Two sided markets are quite distinct
from traditional markets because
they involve the choice of not only
a price but also a price structure.
In a traditional one sided market,
like let's say the market for widgets,
the producer of the widget
says a price for the widget.
And all consumers who value that widget
at that price, and are willing to pay it,
are going to purchase that widget.
In a two-sided market,
like a card network system,
the card network is essentially
the intermediary between
two different, distinct,
traditional markets.
The intermediary with
respect to consumers, and
the intermediary with respect to
merchants who accept these cards.
And so they have to choose not just
prices on both sides of the market but
also a price structure.
How much to levy the cost of processing
these particular transactions,
on consumers relative to on merchants.
Card networks are far from
the only two sided network and
this is a canonical set of issues that
are discussed in the economics literature.
The nature of how costs are distributed
between two different sides of this
market vary depending on the kind
of market we're talking about.
So for example, for newspapers,
we tend to not really charge consumers
significantly for reading the news.
But we charge advertisers
quite significantly for
advertising on those platforms.
With respect to card networks,
cardholders tend to actually be charged,
in essence, a negative transaction fee,
because they receive rewards for
transacting with payment instruments
like debit cards and credit cards.
And the costs of transaction
are primarily borne by merchants who
pay high processing fees for
processing these transactions.
Note that one issue with traditional
two sided-market relative to
a one-sided market, is just having
a cost that's elevated relative
to what you think the true cost
is on one side of the market,
isn't necessarily indicative
of market failure.
So one side of the market, you often
treat as a loss leader in the perspective
of card networks,
that's the consumer side of the market,
where consumers actually have
a negative cost on that side.
The negative cost that consumers have
means a higher cost than you would set in
a traditional one sided market, is going
to be born by merchants in this setting.
From an antitrust perspective,
this post is some complexity for antitrust
authorities because simply seeing an
elevated cause relative to what you would
expect on one side of the market isn't by
itself indicative of a market failure.
Setting up a two sided
market is quite complicated,
because the platform is essentially
valueless until you have substantial
participation on both sides of the market.
So even if you set really
attractive credit card terms and
give consumers a ton of rewards,
your platform is valueless unless you
can also convince merchants
to accept your cards.
Similarly, if you're Uber, you don't
want to charge consumers too much or
no one will ride with you, but you also
don't want to pay drivers too little or
no one will drive for you.
A canonical example that's use to
explain two-sided markets is actually
interestingly night clubs.
And I apologize for the heteronormative
nature of the example I'm about to use but
I think it illustrates
the point quite well.
A night club which only has male patrons,
doesn't have much value to the men who
are patronizing the institution unless
they are able to convince women to also
join and attend at the night club.
Similarly a night club with no men but
only women doesn't have much
value to the women unless they are able
to convince men to also attend.
Depending on how desirable the extra
woman at the nightclub is men, or
the extra man at the nightclub
is to be existing women,
the nature of the payment structure or
the nature of the price structure
in this market might be different
than what you would expect.
For example, this explains why
ladies drink free at certain
nightclubs on certain evenings
because it's very attractive to be
able to recruit more female patrons for
the existing male customers.
Current networks have value and
cost to both sides of the market.
Both in the merchant
acceptance relationship, and
in the card holder usage relationship.
On the merchant side, cards are immensely
valuable because customers that
don't carry cash are able to
buy products and services.
And in this day and age customers tend
to expect that they're going to be
able to pay for goods with their debit and
credit cards, and you may lose
customers if you're not willing to
accept these transaction methods.
Additionally the sort of cash based theft
concerns or the counterfeiting concerns
are significantly reduced by the existence
of card networks in these markets.
The costs though, are quite significant
depending on the payment instrument and
depending on whether it's a debit card or
credit card or
what particular card network you operate
with, merchants can pay between 1 and
3% of transaction value in
the form of processing fees.
That's quite a significant sum, and
as card usage has really exploded
in the last 30 years, these interchange
costs, as they're referred to,
are often the second highest cost of
operation for merchants after labor.
On the card holder side
of this relationship,
in terms of card holder usage, credit
cards are attractive because they tend
to come with attractive rewards,
things like cashback or airline miles.
There is also the ease of
transacting with credit and
debit cards that simply involve a swipe
of your card rather than having
to deal with the cash that you may or
may not have in your wallet.
But again there are real risks of
transacting with these payment
instruments.
One concern from the consumer perspective
is the possibility of credit or
debit card fraud on their account, which
can depending on your card number and
depending on the payment instrument,
be quite challenging to resolve.
Another concern that's quite distinct to
credit cards is that as we've discussed,
credit cards tend to couple
financial transactions dealing with
financial borrowing.
So you may tend to really use your credit
card quite significantly because you're
really attracted to the ability to
generate a ton of credit card rewards.
But if you don't keep track of your credit
card payments, then you're tending to
bear high delinquency fees and get trapped
in expensive cycles of consumer debt.
Another real attraction of credit and
debit card usage from the perspective
of consumers is this allows
them to transact it online in ways
that cash simply wouldn't do so.
As e-commerce has grown quite
significantly in the early 2000s
transacting online for goods was
less than 1% of total retail sales.
In 2018 it was almost 10%,
so as it's become common for
us to purchase goods from eBay or Amazon,
the value of credit and
debit payments has skyrocketed.
And also again from a distributional
perspective, those consumers who don't
have access to a debit card,
let's say because they're unbanked, or
those consumers who don't have access
to a credit card, let's say because
they're subprime consumers who are risky
borrowers that banks don't want to
lend to in this manner, are actually shut
out from an important means of being
able to transact for
goods online through e-commerce.
A long with e-commerce another
significant driver of growth
of card usage has been the expansion
of credit card rewards programs.
Following the financial
crises as regulation that
we will discuss in
a later module restricted
the ability of banks to generate
revenues from debit processing fees.
This regulation left untouched credit
processing fees, and so banks and
card networks had every to try and
encourage greater use of credit cards.
Credit cards also tend to have higher
processing fees generally making,
from the bank's perspective, it really
attractive for consumers to try and
tack primarily with these
credit instruments.
In order to get consumers to use
credit cards more frequently,
card networks and financial institutions
realized that they could do
well by offering really
attractive rewards and
cash-back loyalty programs to
consumers for their transactions.
Additionally, as credit cards have become
an incredibly competitive industry,
and one in which consumers really do
display a willingness to switch credit
cards depending on the rewards that
they're being offered, card networks and
financial institutions really have to best
each other with respect to the rewards
they offer consumers in order to
maintain substantial market share.
Consumers tend to be highly responsive
to the offerings of rewards and
to the transact much more with
cards when it is attractive
to them from a rewards perspective.
Recent work by the Federal Reserve Bank
in Boston finds that consumers generally
spend more and increase their debt
when offered 1% cash back rewards.
And evidence from Credit Bureau data
confirms that consumers substitute their
spending from other cards to the card with
cashback, and decrease debt on their other
cards in order to take advantage
of attractive rewards programs.
This is quite important, because it
suggests that consumers are increasing
their indebtedness past the level
which perhaps is socially optimal,
in order to take advantage of the
existence of attractive rewards programs.